GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill. Judy Woodruff is
away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: A
powerful earthquake rocks
Afghanistan, rattling parts of
Pakistan
and India as well, chaos on the
streets, as the number of dead
and injured climbs.
Also ahead: a meat lover's
nightmare. The World Health
Organization finds eating bacon,
sausage, and other processed
meats can raise the risk of
cancer.
Plus, Secretary of Education
Arne Duncan on reducing the
amount of testing in the
nation's
schools.
ARNE DUNCAN, U.S. Education
Secretary: Where we are doing
things that are redundant, or
duplicative, or not helpful,
well, that's a waste of
everyone's time and energy.
GWEN IFILL: And going beyond the
headlines, what two teenagers'
lives tell us about the
cycle of attacks in
the Middle East.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: All this
playing out amid a surge of
violence between Palestinians
and
Israelis, the story of Naor and
Ahmed a microcosm of a wider
narrative.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: The death toll is
still climbing from the powerful
earthquake that struck
Northeastern
Afghanistan much earlier today.
At least 263 were killed, most
of them in neighboring Pakistan.
The quake was centered deep
under the Hindu Kush mountains,
but at magnitude 7.5, its
reach extended well into India.
Lindsey Hilsum of Independent
Television News has this report.
In Gilgit, on Pakistan's border
with Afghanistan, the earthquake
caused a landslide. A security
camera in Mingora in Pakistan
captured the moment in someone's
garage. And the news reader
on Ariana TV in the Afghan
capital, Kabul, found himself
unable to continue.
Several buildings in Kabul
crumbled, even though the
epicenter of the quake was 400
kilometers to the north.
MAN (through translator): We
felt the earthquake. We tried to
get out of the house. It was
very
big. The walls were destroyed.
LINDSEY HILSUM: Now there's
a danger of aftershocks.
Nearer the epicenter, in
Taloqan, a girls school was
struck. At least 12 students
were
killed trying to rush out, while
more than 40 were taken to
hospital. People here are
poor and deprived at the best of
times. Hospitals are
rudimentary.
In the Pakistan border city of
Peshawar, several houses
collapsed. Earthquakes hit the
poor
far more than the rich because
their homes are less sturdily
built. The quake struck
hardest in remote mountainous
areas of Pakistan and
Afghanistan. There is little
precise information
yet of how many were killed or
how great the damage. Though
there is no doubt people will
need help, it will be
hard to get it to them.
GWEN IFILL: Authorities in both
Afghanistan and Pakistan say the
casualty count is expected
to rise as rescuers reach
more remote areas.
Migrants and refugees surged
across the Balkan states again
today, after European leaders
held an emergency summit. Police
in Croatia said more than 13,000
people have crossed
its eastern border with Serbia
within the past 24 hours. And
nearly 10,000 moved on
from Croatia westward
to Slovenia.
Meanwhile, in Brussels, European
Union leaders said they
committed early today to bring
order
to the chaos.
JEAN-CLAUDE JUNCKER, President,
European Commission: The only
way to restore order to the
situation
is to slow down the uncontrolled
flows of people. The policy of
waving through people
to neighboring countries has to
stop. I want to be clear. People
must be registrated, no
registration, no rights.
GWEN IFILL: The E.U. leaders
agreed to accommodate 100,000
people at registration centers
and
to give Greece more help.
Meanwhile, the U.N.'s
humanitarian office said today,
new fighting in Syria has
displaced
at least another 120,000 people.
That's more than double an
earlier estimate.
An anti-migrant faction in
Poland scored big in Sunday
elections. The conservative Law
and Justice Party celebrated
last night after winning an a
near majority in Parliament.
The group opposes taking in
migrants and adopting the euro
currency.
Conservatives in Argentina also
did well, as opposition
presidential candidate Mauricio
Macri forced a run-off with the
ruling party's nominee on
Sunday.
And in Guatemala, former TV
comedian Jimmy Morales
overwhelmingly won the
presidency.
He attacked corruption and
promised smartphones for
children.
There's word this evening of a
possible two-year budget deal in
Congress. House and Senate
aides say it would allow
increased spending, despite
budget caps, but defense would
increase
more than domestic programs.
White House spokesman Josh
Earnest confirmed the ongoing
talks today, but said it is not
a done deal.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary: We have worked
assiduously to protect the
privacy and confidentiality of
those discussions, principally
because they're based on this
principle that nothing is agreed
to in the context of those
discussions until everything
is agreed to. And as I stand
here today, not everything has
been agreed to. That means
that nothing at this point
has been agreed to.
GWEN IFILL: Without a deal, the
government will run out of money
on December 11. Any
agreement could also include an
increase in the federal
borrowing limit that expires
November
3.
An Oklahoma judge ordered a
mental evaluation today for a
woman accused of driving her car
into a homecoming crowd at
Oklahoma State University.
Adacia Chambers is being held
on $1 million bond. She faces
preliminary counts of
second-degree murder. Four
people
died and dozens of others were
injured in Saturday's crash.
Chambers' lawyer denied
she was drunk or taking drugs at
the time. He said she's mentally
ill.
Investigators in Vancouver,
Canada, worked today to figure
out why a whale watching boat
sank. Five British citizens died
in Sunday's incident. One is
still missing. Amateur video
showed the 65-foot vessel
partially submerged late Sunday
afternoon off Tofino on
Vancouver
Island. Rescuers and others
rushed to the waterfront to
help.
JOSIE OSBORNE, Tofino, British
Columbia, Mayor: The outpouring
from the community has been
phenomenal. And seeing the way
people come forward and they're
offering everything from
food and blankets and clothing
to just people to be with people
and help them and helping
the ambulance, the paramedics,
the hospital staff, everything,
it's -- businesses, everybody.
It just comes out and
says, what can I do?
GWEN IFILL: In all, there
were 27 people on the boat.
Remnants of Hurricane Patricia
moved along the Gulf Coast
today. Heavy rain continued
from Eastern Texas to the
Florida Panhandle, and flash
flood alerts were up for several
states. Meanwhile, Texas was
starting to dry out after the
system dumped more than a foot
of rain over the weekend.
The University of Mississippi
today has removed the state flag
from its place of honor on
campus. The flag includes the
Confederate battle emblem, and
students, faculty and others
had urged that it be taken down.
University police lowered the
banner this morning, and
took it to the
school's archives.
Wall Street had trouble making
any headway today. The Dow Jones
industrial average lost
23 points to close at 17623. The
Nasdaq rose nearly three points,
and the S&P 500 slipped
four.
And the National Football League
is claiming success with letting
people worldwide watch
a game online for free, instead
of showing it on television.
Yahoo! streamed Sunday's
Buffalo-Jacksonville game in
London, and got more than 33
million views. The league says
the experiment proves streaming
can become the main means of
distribution for more games.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the secretary of education
rethinks testing in U.S.
schools;
how eating bacon might cause
cancer; an inside look at
restoring the work of Italy's
master
painters, and much more.
When it comes to standardized
testing in schools, how much is
too much?
In a policy reversal, the Obama
administration, which has
supported student and teacher
assessment,
now says testing has gotten out
of hand. This weekend, the White
House recommended capping
testing at 2 percent
of class time.
A new report conducted by the
Council of Great City Schools
found the average student sits
for as many as 112 mandatory
standardized tests between
kindergarten and high school
graduation.
Earlier today, I sat down with
the outgoing education
secretary, Arne Duncan, and
Michael
Casserly, the executive director
of the Council of Great City
Schools, about the problem and
the proposed solutions.
Mr. Casserly, Secretary Duncan,
thank you very much for joining
us.
Secretary Duncan, you first
started talking about the
inadequacies of testing and the
shortfalls, the flaws two, three
years ago. What took so long for
the Education Department
to embrace this idea today?
ARNE DUNCAN, U.S. Education
Secretary: Well, I think we have
embraced this idea for a while.
What's different now is we
actually have data. And I have
been talking about this, as you
know, for a while, and the
president has. But what we had
were lots of anecdotes. And
we knew we needed to get to a
better spot, but no one had ever
surveyed the nation.
So, I went to Mike about two
years ago and said, would you be
willing to ask your districts
what to do in this space? And he
was ahead of me. He said, guess
what? We're already
doing it.
And it's taken them two years.
It's that complicated to get
together. But now we're beyond
anecdotes.
We have facts, and where there
is too much time spent on
testing, a redundancy or
duplicative
stuff, that doesn't make any
sense. And we both want high
standards. We both want good
assessments that
drive instruction.
But where we're wasting students
time, where we're adding stress,
we need to challenge
that status quo. And that's
exactly what we're trying to do.
GWEN IFILL: Mr. Casserly, some
people have already said that
the solution is not the
solution. The federal government
saying you should put this cap
on testing is not the
solution to the overtesting that
started in the first place.
MICHAEL CASSERLY, Executive
Director, Council of Great City
Schools: Well, I actually agree
with that.
I think this is a very
complicated issue. It involves
the time that's devoted to
testing.
It involves the quality of the
test. It involves the redundancy
of the test. It involves the
use of the test. It involves all
kinds of pretty complicated
factors.
You might solve a little bit of
the time problem by putting a
time cap on this, but you could
also do damage at the same time
if you don't address some of
those other questions. So
if you lowered the cap to, say,
1 percent, you could still have
redundancy in the test,
and you could still have bad
tests. There may be less of
them. But you haven't solved
the larger problem.
GWEN IFILL: So, how do you guard
against unintended consequences,
as happened from the testing?
MICHAEL CASSERLY: Well, I think
one of the things that all of us
have to do now is to
have a more thoughtful
conversation about what smart
assessments would actually be
and
see if we can figure out some
way to coordinate this a lot
better across federal, state and
local entities.
One of the things that was
really clear to us from the
research that we did on this was
that these entities don't
necessarily talk to each other.
These layers of the education
apparatus don't necessarily talk
to each other. So we have plenty
of examples where people
were administering overlapping
tests, and kids were actually
toggling back and forth
from one test to another, when
it could have been solved by
just having differing layers
of government talk to each
other a little bit better.
GWEN IFILL: Secretary Duncan,
government talking to each other
is not necessarily what
government
does best. In fact, there are
people who say that part of the
overtesting was a result
of people trying to meet
standards that you were
promoting, Race to the Top,
Common Core
standards, and, as a result, you
kept layering one test on top of
the other.
Do you feel that you might have
some responsibility for that?
ARNE DUNCAN: Oh, no,
I think we all do.
And I think, Gwen, what has been
so -- what I have appreciated so
much is, this is -- honestly,
this is real leadership in
action. This is our major urban
school districts coming together
and saying we need to do better.
This is the state chief officers
coming together with
us saying we need to do better.
And it's us being
self-reflective and looking in
the mirror
and say we want to
do better together.
And, as you know better than I,
so often, in Washington, people
just yell and point
fingers and they just get louder
about I'm right and everyone
else is wrong. I think
what we're all trying to do is
say, how do we better partner,
how do we better advice,
how do we get to a better
spot for children?
Again, the goal here is not to
test. The goal is to improve
instruction, to improve what
is going on every single day for
that child in classroom. And
where we're getting good
information to teachers and to
parents and to students
themselves that empower them to
build upon strengths and work on
weaknesses, that's a good thing.
Where we are doing things that
are redundant, or duplicative,
or not helpful, well, that's
a waste of everyone's
time and energy.
GWEN IFILL: Well, it's not just
Washington. A lot of the
movement to opt out of these
tests started in local school
districts and around the country
with parents, with teachers.
How much of that will be
satisfied by Washington saying
do less?
ARNE DUNCAN: Well, I think there
are two sides of this coin,
folks who think we just need
to do more and more testing. I
think that is wrong. Folks who
think we shouldn't do
any assessments,
that's equally wrong.
And there is a commonsense
middle ground here. This is very
much a civil rights issue.
Historically
in this nation, we swept under
the rug the horrific disparities
in outcomes, the horrific
achievement gap between black
and white students and Latino
and white students and poor
students
and wealthier students. Too much
testing is bad. Walking away
from assessment is equally
bad.
But let's find the commonsense
middle ground. I think that's
what we're all striving to
do and to do together.
GWEN IFILL: It doesn't sound
like you have figured out where
that sweet spot is, Mr.
Casserly.
MICHAEL CASSERLY: No,
we really haven't.
And part of our goal here was
just to gather some data on how
much testing was actually
done. We haven't figured out the
right balance yet. We did
announce today that the Council
of Great City Schools, in
coordination with Council of
Chief State School Officers,
would
form a commission to start
looking at exactly what the
right balance would be, what
would
models and options for school
districts be that would present
a much more rational and
intelligent assessment system.
GWEN IFILL: In the meantime,
there has been a huge, I would
say, explosion of a business
model which is based on testing.
Don't you anticipate pushback
from those companies who
have been behind a
lot of these tests?
MICHAEL CASSERLY: oh, I think
the answer to that is, yes, of
course we do. We're not naive
about this and we certainly
don't think that just because we
put out some data about how
much testing it is that all of a
sudden the test publishers are
going to go, oh, gee,
heavens, I never knew, we should
stop selling these tests.
I don't believe that for a
second. But I do think that, in
cooperation with the federal
government, the Department of
Education, the states and the
big urban public school systems,
that we can at least start
creating a more intelligent
conversation about what it is
we buy.
ARNE DUNCAN: Gwen, if I could
add, I think it's just so
important part of the
conversation
is on the amount, and that's an
important conversation to have,
but that's maybe half
of the battle here.
The big thing that we have to
get to is, are these assessments
high-quality? And so, for
example, if folks just cut back
testing and they go to
fill-in-the-bubble tests, that
would be a disaster. We want
writing to be assessed. That
takes a little time. We want
critical thinking to be
assessed, and so making sure
that there are high-quality
assessments
that are available in real time,
the results, to teachers, to
parents, to students, so that,
again, instruction improves on
a daily, on a weekly basis.
GWEN IFILL: How do you measure
effectiveness? That's the other
piece of this. It's one thing
to have quality. It's another
thing to have quantity.
But then you have to be able to
measure that learning has
actually approved. And that's
been the defense which testers
have used, which is we need to
have that basic line.
ARNE DUNCAN: I think the world
is changing and it's really
important.
Historically, Gwen, as you know,
you had 50 different states
doing 50 different tests,
which you couldn't compare and
frankly cost a heck of a lot
more money because everyone
was doing their own thing. And
what you now have, again, thanks
to Mike's leadership and
the state chief officers and
others' leadership, governors'
leadership, is you have more and
more states starting
to work together.
And so the real key in all this,
Gwen, is how do we accelerate
the pace of change? Who
is doing a fantastic job with
English-language learners? Who
is doing a great job in rural
communities, or in inner-city
communities, or in Native
American reservations and how
do we replicate and share what
is working and scale those best
practices?
GWEN IFILL: And you think
it can be effective?
ARNE DUNCAN: I know
it can be effective.
And I visit schools all --
probably more schools than
almost anybody across 50 states
and I
see extraordinary work. We met
with two teachers earlier today
who talked about how the data
they're getting is helping them
not to teach to 25 or 30
students in aggregate, but to
teach individually, personalized
way -- in a personalized way to
every single child and
help them get to where
they need to go.
So, a lot of learning to do
going forward, but great
assessments actually improve
instruction,
drive right teaching and
learning, are not in conflict
with it. We just have to make
that more the norm and
not the exception.
GWEN IFILL: Secretary Arne
Duncan, Michael Casserly, thank
you both very much.
MICHAEL CASSERLY: Thank you.
ARNE DUNCAN: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: We return now to the
violence that's lately consuming
Israel and the Palestinian
territories.
Tonight, we focus on one single
event involving two young
teenage boys on October 12, an
episode
which has triggered more anger
and response than any of the
others in the latest wave.
"NewsHour" special correspondent
Martin Seemungal returned to the
scene to find out more about
happened, and how it has
affected the already fractured
relationship between local
Israelis
and Palestinians.
A warning: This report
contains some graphic images.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: The scenes on
this street are calm, giving no
indication of the violence
that happened here. The video is
too graphic to show: a
13-year-old boy on the ground
bleeding.
The boy is Ahmed Manasra, a
Palestinian. The story leading
up to this shocking moment is
as disturbing as the video.
EYAL ELBAZI, Witness: He stabbed
a little kid right here.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Police have
accused Ahmed and his
15-year-old cousin Hassan of
stabbing
two Israelis, one also 13 years
old. Police released
closed-circuit video footage of
what
they say are Ahmed and Hassan
running from the scene armed
with knives. Minutes later,
another camera shows Hassan
lunging across the train tracks
at police, before he is shot
and killed.
Ahmed is pursued by police
and a furious crowd.
Eyal Elbazi was in that crowd.
EYAL ELBAZI: What can you do?
You see him running up to that
area that there's a lot
of people over there. We thought
he is running out stabbing more
people.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: They caught
him at the train tracks.
According to the initial
reports, Ahmed wound up here on
the tracks because he was hit by
a car, but the Israeli doctors
who treated him say his injuries
fit the profile of someone
who had been struck by a blunt
instrument. We may never know,
but we do know that the
video triggered widespread
anger among Palestinians.
It went viral on social media.
The cell phone video, recorded
by an Israeli bystander, was
viewed millions of times on
Facebook, complete with
background sound of people
cursing at
him. His father, Saleh, says
it was unbearable to watch.
SALEH MANASRA, Father (through
translator): A policeman kicked
him on the leg twice. A
second Israeli called him names.
The third was calling, "Kill
him, kill him." If it was
a cat or a dog on the road, you
would help it. He was a child.
No one helped him.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Mysone
Mahane MD-BO is Ahmed's aunt.
MYSONE MAHANE, Aunt: I was very
shocked when I saw the picture.
This is the first picture
we have seen. We were very
shocked. Yes, I cried. Of
course, I cried.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: But Elbazi
says the video didn't tell the
whole story.
EYAL ELBAZI: After one or two
guys was trying to stop him with
a knife and his craziness,
they beat him up a little bit.
Yes, they beat him up, but a lot
of Israelis stopped them
to -- enough, enough, enough,
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: And Elbazi
points out that Ahmed did
receive medical treatment along
with the 13-year-old Jewish boy
he allegedly stabbed. That boy,
simply known as Naor -- his
full name hasn't been released
-- stumbled away from the scene
and collapsed before paramedics
stabilized him.
His family declined to be
interviewed. But we spoke to
others who know him, including
his classmates.
DANIEL, Friend (through
translator): He is a fine boy, a
good boy, very sociable, very
friendly. He loves everyone. We
are his friends. He is in our
class.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Well-known to
the shopkeepers in the
neighborhood, Gil Tzemach says
he came
to his store often.
GIL TZEMACH, Shopkeeper (through
translator): I feel pain for the
victim for a boy who basically
just came to buy some candy. It
could have been me 20 seconds
before or after.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Ahmed is also
described as quiet and
well-liked. His mother showed
us these pictures. He is fond of
animals, keeps pets, a turtle,
and pigeons. None of
his friends or family believe
Ahmed attacked 13-year-old Naor
with a knife, especially
his father.
SALEH MANASRA (through
translator): A 13-year-old boy
is not able to stab anyone. He
is not
physically strong
enough to do it.
MYSONE MAHANE: We don't support
killing, not for Jews, not for
any -- for Israelis. We
don't support this, of course,
especially the honest people,
the innocent people,
Palestinians
or Israelis. We
don't support this.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Even Elbazi,
one of the Israeli witnesses to
the attack, is finding
it difficult to comprehend, but
thinks he knows what happened.
EYAL ELBAZI: I think 13 year old
doesn't know what to think. I
don't think his father knew.
I don't think his mother knew. I
don't think the family knew
about it. I think he did it
from Facebook or
something like that.
I don't think his dad will
approve something like that. Any
dad wouldn't approve his son
will go and to murder people.
It's not right. It's wrong. He's
13 years old. He's not supposed
to do that.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: All of this is
playing out amid a surge of
violence between Palestinians
and Israelis, the story of Naor
and Ahmed a microcosm of a wider
narrative.
Naor comes from Pisgat Ze'ev, a
Jewish settlement in Eastern
Jerusalem. It is built on land
captured by Israel in 1967, and
is considered illegal under
international law. Israel
disputes
that.
Ahmed comes from the Palestinian
village of Beit Hanina. Pisgat
Ze'ev and Beit Hanina
are separated by a highway, but
there is an enormous cultural
and religious divide. Jews
in Pisgat Ze'ev say they rarely
come to Beit Hanina because they
are afraid of being attacked.
But there is mistrust
and fear on both sides.
Has it changed attitudes of you
and your classmates towards
Israelis?
MOHAMMED, Palestinian: We hate
them, yes. They're bad people.
They kill Palestinians.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL:
Fifteen-year-old Mohammed, also
from Beit Hanina and a close
friend of
Ahmed's now deceased cousin,
said he was moved watching the
video.
MOHAMMED: He was laying down. He
got up. He was -- a lot of
blood, but they were looking
at him and they were not helping
him. They were not helping him.
That felt so bad.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Speaking to
young people from both sides of
this divide, it was hard
to imagine a future much
brighter than their parents'.
BOY (through translator): Our
friend Naor was exactly the same
age as the Palestinian
kid who stabbed him. Now
I hate Arabs even more.
NOAM, Israel (through
translator): I felt like
grabbing a knife and stabbing
Arabs as
revenge. My friend did nothing.
He was on his way back home on a
bike. And then when
I saw the attacker injured, I
felt good watching him being
injured. I'm not against all
Arabs,
just bad Arabs who commit
terrorist attacks.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: The evening of
the incident, Israeli police
raided the Manasra home in
Beit Hanina, confiscating phones
and belongings. Ahmed's cousin
was arrested.
Two nights later, police
returned, following up on
reports that Palestinians in
Beit Hanina
were throwing rocks at cars
entering Pisgat Ze'ev. The
police commander delivered a
very
clear message to Ahmed's
extended family gathered in the
courtyard.
MAN (through translator): If
another person comes out and
throws a stone or a bottle onto
the road, everyone who is
standing here, I promise, I will
break his arms and legs.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: The stabbing
incident also led to acrimony at
the highest levels. At
one point, Palestinian leader
Mahmoud Abbas accused Israel of
executing young Palestinians,
referencing the video of Ahmed
lying on the ground as evidence,
prompting a swift and
angry response from Israeli
Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu.
He accused Abbas of incitement
and produced a video showing
Ahmed being fed in his hospital
bed. Ahmed's family said their
lawyer was the one feeding him.
Tareq Barghout says he
was feeding Ahmed Jell-O when
someone from Prime Minister
Netanyahu's office arrived.
TAREQ BARGHOUT, Attorney
(through translator): I felt
disgusted. I put on Facebook,
look,
the battle is now in the media.
It's not legal. They violated
the law. It's illegal to publish
a photo of a minor
while he is detained.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Dr. Asher
Salmon is the deputy director of
the hospital where Ahmed
was treated.
DR. ASHER SALMON, Hospital
Deputy Director: In general, I
would prefer that minors
wouldn't
be videotaped, would not -- and
pictures wouldn't be discharged.
But in a condition when false
data is spread all over the
world that this kid was
executed, killed, whatever, so I
think
it had put things in
the proper context.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Hadassah
Hospital in Ein Kerem in
Jerusalem prides itself for
treating
all patients equally, Israelis
and Palestinians. Dr. Salmon
says they were criticized by
some
for treating Ahmed.
DR. ASHER SALMON: I did hear
words like, why do you treat
terrorists? Terrorists should
be killed, and things like that
which, of course, I am not even
going to respond to
these type of comments.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: The same
policy exists at the Hadassah
Hospital on Mount Scopus, where
13-year-old Naor is being
treated. In fact, Naor's lead
doctor is Arab-Israeli, the one
who took the father
to his son's bedside.
DR. AHMED EID, Hadassah
Hospital: He knew because I told
him. I am Ahmed Eid, my name.
I guess that he figured that I
am not Jew, I am Arab. So, it
was clear to him.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: And
there were no issues?
DR. AHMED EID: No. No.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Ilanit Tal is
the head nurse on the ward where
Naor is being treated. She
says it is a mixed staff and
this recent wave of violence is
particularly painful to deal
with.
ILANIT TAL, Nurse: I'm used to
this attack in Jerusalem, but
not with children. It's
difficult to see that -- the
children attacking us, it's
difficult, you know, and
children
being hurt, it's not
-- it's different.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Naor is no
longer in critical condition and
is expected to be discharged
from hospital next week. Ahmed
was released from hospital, but
remains under arrest. Police
are treating him as a terrorist
an, he is expected to be charged
with attempted murder.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Martin Seemungal in Jerusalem.
Stay with us.
Coming up on NewsHour": some
presidential campaigns ramp up,
while others scale back;
and what it takes to bring new
life to centuries-old
masterpieces.
But, first, as you have probably
heard in a headline or two by
now, it was a sobering
day for meat lovers, especially
in a country that ranks second
in the world for eating
the most meat.
William Brangham has the story
and some perspective on what you
need to know.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: This new
report released today by the
World Health Organization found
that often-beloved meats, like
sausage, bacon, ham, and hot
dogs, can cause certain types
of cancer. Prior studies had
established similar connections,
but the WHO is the most
prominent
health organization to
specifically say processed meats
can cause cancer.
It looked at more than 800
studies around the world. It
also found that eating freshly
prepared red meat like steak or
pork or lamb probably can cause
cancer as well.
Here to help us sort through
this is Jonathan Schoenfeld. He
is a professor of radiation
oncology at Harvard Medical
School, He co-wrote a notable
paper for "The American Journal
of Clinical Nutrition" in 2012
about the links between diet and
cancer.
Dr. Schoenfeld, thank
you for doing this.
The WHO certainly put the scare
into meat eaters all over the
country today. How much
of this -- if I'm someone who
has a couple of slices of bacon
or a turkey sandwich a
few times a week, how
worried should I be?
DR. JONATHAN SCHOENFELD,
Harvard Medical School: Sure.
So, I Think it's important to
realize that what the World
Health Organization was, like
you said, as looked at hundreds
of studies and put the evidence
from those studies together
to show that the consumption of
processed or red meats was quite
possibly associated
with an increased risk of a
variety of different types of
cancer.
Now, what these studies did was
look at the overall risk of
cancer. And so it's hard to
say that any one piece of bacon,
for example, or piece of meat
would increase your risk
of cancer by a certain amount,
but, in total, you know, these
studies show that being one
of the people who consume the
most amounts of meats or
processed foods could
potentially
increase your risk
of these cancers.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, let's
break this down a little bit.
When we say processed meats,
what are we talking about?
DR. JONATHAN SCHOENFELD: So,
it's actually a definition that
encompasses a variety of
different ways to add flavor
or to help preserve the meats.
So the different studies that
the World Health Organization
looked at might have had a
slightly
different definition of what
processed meats meant. So it
could be things like salting,
it could be things like adding
chemicals to help preserve the
food, or to help add flavor
to these different foods.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Is it the
process of processing itself
that causes the problems or is
it the
cooking of processed meats?
DR. JONATHAN SCHOENFELD:
You really couldn't say.
And the authors of this report
admit as much. What they could
look at is the total. The
act of processing the meat or
the consumption of the processed
meat was associated with
an increased risk of cancer, but
the studies don't allow you to
actually dissect that further
and figure out what exactly it
is about processed meats that
may lead to the increased risk.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I know a lot
of people in the attempt to be
-- to lead a healthier life
and eat healthier foods have
switched to things like chicken
and turkey.
If those meats are processed, do
those same risks come along with
them?
DR. JONATHAN SCHOENFELD: It's
something that's unknown.
There is certainly some
rationale to think that that
might be the case, but these
studies
specifically looked at the
processing of red meat and
whether or not that posed an
increased
risk of these types of cancers.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, my
understanding is that the WHO
has now put processed meats in
the same category as cigarettes.
And we have seen some headlines
today asking, basically,
is eating a hot dog now
like smoking a cigarette?
Help me understand that. What is
the level of risk here? Or is
that outlandish to say?
DR. JONATHAN SCHOENFELD: Yes, I
think that's a very important
point.
The World Health Organization
classifies things into their
risk categories based upon the
level of evidence, and not upon
the magnitude of risk. So while
it may be in the same category
as cigarette smoking, the
magnitude of the risk associated
with processed meats doesn't
nearly compare to the magnitude
of risk that's been found with
cigarette smoking.
What that determination just
means is that there are numerous
studies that have found
similar findings. The risk --
the relative risk for smoking is
much higher, and unlike
the consumption of meats, the
consumption of excess cigarettes
or tobacco doesn't provide
any nutritional benefits.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I see.
How comfortable are you with the
strength of this science? I
mean, the industry and
some other scientists have said
that the WHO might be
overstating the case a little
bit.
How strong do you feel that this
is really a concern we all ought
to be worried about?
DR. JONATHAN SCHOENFELD: Yes, I
think it's important to
understand the strengths and
limitation of this type of study
and this type of recommendation.
I think we can have more
confidence in the results
because the methodology that is
used
is looking at not one study by
itself, but the aggregate
findings of many and, indeed,
hundreds of studies. But it's
important to realize that the
magnitude of the effects
and the absolute increase in
risk with the excess consumption
of processed meats, of
red meat, is actually relatively
small, especially with other
things that we can modify in our
lifestyle and diet, such
as cigarette smoking.
So, you know, I think it's
reasonable to be mindful of
these findings, but I don't
think
that it should warrant an
overall change in people's
lifestyles at this point.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right, Dr.
Jonathan Schoenfeld of Harvard
Medical School, thank
you very much.
DR. JONATHAN
SCHOENFELD: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: The presidential
candidates are working overtime,
from a big Democratic
fund-raising
dinner in Iowa featuring the
newly shrunken field of Hillary
Clinton, Bernie Sanders and
Martin O'Malley, to fresh jabs
and counterjabs on the
Republican side, as
front-runners Donald
Trump and Ben Carson begin
to take aim at each other.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate: Ben Carson is a very
low-energy person. Actually,
I think Ben Carson is lower
energy than Jeb, if you want to
know the truth. We need strong
energy.
BEN CARSON (R), Presidential
Candidate: I don't get into the
mud pit, and I'm not going
to be talking about people. I
will tell you, in terms of
energy, I'm not sure that
there's
anybody else running who's spent
18 or 20 hours intently
operating on somebody.
GWEN IFILL: And last night, Vice
President Joe Biden told "60
Minutes" that the only
reason he didn't run for
president is that he could not
win.
QUESTION: You wouldn't have
considered running for president
unless you thought or had some
doubts about Hillary Clinton.
JOSEPH BIDEN, Vice President of
the United States: Not at all.
That has nothing to do
with it. I have said from the
beginning, look, I like Hillary.
Hillary and I get along
together.
The only reason to run is
because I -- I still think I
could do a better job than
anybody
else could do.
GWEN IFILL: So what better time
for Politics Monday with Tamara
Keith of NPR and Amy Walter
of The Cook Political Report?
Let's start by talking about
Donald Trump and Ben Carson,
who, it appears, are now about
to go after each other because
-- and let's take a look at the
poll numbers, which explains
why -- all of a sudden, they're
tied -- or I should say Ben
Carson is surging in Iowa.
The latest Des Moines Register
poll has him at 28 percent,
Donald Trump at 19 percent.
And in New Hampshire, the latest
CBS poll has him at -- has
Donald Trump at 38 percent
and Carson at 12 percent.
Donald Trump, Amy, when he's
asked about these polls -- he
likes to talk about polls.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: He loves talking about
the polls.
GWEN IFILL: He now thinks that
the polls, especially the one in
Iowa, where he's trailing,
might be wrong.
AMY WALTER: Well, of course,
because how could he possibly
not be in first place?
Well, I think we are now at sort
of the new stage here in this
campaign, where we know
we still have a very strong
group of Republican primary
voters looking for an outsider.
They
liked Trump earlier this summer.
As we have moved on into the
fall, you can already start
to feel that he may have,
reality show lingo here, jumped
the shark a little bit. Here's
starting to wear a
little bit thin.
GWEN IFILL: I have heard
this before, Amy.
AMY WALTER: I know. Hey, listen,
here's what I will say to you.
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
AMY WALTER: This isn't
indicative of everything, but
sitting in -- both looking at
data from
Iowa, listening to some
Republican voters in a focus
group last week, they still like
Donald Trump.
Let's be very clear. He still
has a very important place in
this primary field. But what you
can start to hear from voters,
from Republican primary voters,
is, I don't know about the
temperament. I don't know if I
trust him in that job, hence the
rise of Ben Carson, who
is the exact opposite
in temperament.
GWEN IFILL: Let's talk about Ben
Carson's temperament. Very calm.
He will admit to you
he is a very calm person, which,
of course, is what Donald Trump
was talking about. But
he said some very strong
things this weekend.
He said that abortion is like
slavery. He has been very
definitive in his conservative
views. Do people like him? I
mean, what explains, I guess,
the surge in Iowa?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: I think that a lot of
people who you talk to about
why they like Ben Carson
actually like that he's quiet,
that he's not this bomb thrower,
though the interesting thing is
that a lot of the things he
says, some of the analogies
he makes to Nazism and some
other things are pretty
inflammatory, but he says it
very quietly.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: ... analogies.
TAMARA KEITH: Sort of a doctor
voice, yes. And there have been
some numbers out there
showing that people agree
with what he's saying.
AMY WALTER: Republican
primary voters.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes, Republicans.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
TAMARA KEITH: And we're talking
about Republican primary voters.
We're also talking in Iowa
about a state that is heavily
evangelical in the primary. And
he is appealing to that
sort of very -- he's a
very religious person.
GWEN IFILL: Let's talk about Jeb
Bush, because the last time
Donald Trump accused someone
of being low-energy, it kind of
worked. And Donald Trump and Jeb
Bush have seen the altitude
going out of his
balloon ever since.
Is he pulling back or he is
just reorganizing himself?
AMY WALTER: It is remarkable, I
think, in this race, not so much
that there is an outsider
energy fueling these two
candidates, Carson and Trump.
What I think is the most
remarkable thing on the
Republican side is the vacuum on
the
so-called establishment side,
that no candidate -- we thought
it was going to be Jeb Bush.
He hasn't lived up to
expectations, and no one else
has been able to sort of get in
that
lane as the front-runner on the
establishment side to match up
against the front-runner
on the non-establishment side.
So, Jeb Bush, apparently, they
spent the weekend in Houston
with big donors trying to assure
them that everything is fine,
we got this all under control.
But it's really clear that the
problem for Jeb Bush is, one, he
hasn't been a particularly
strong candidate, and, number
two, he has a message that is
not the right message for
this moment. He is an
establishment candidate who is
talking about his record and his
accomplishments
as governor, when Republican
primary voters want an outsider
and somebody who is going
to shake up the system.
GWEN IFILL: So, obviously, there
are other Republicans who see an
opportunity here, among
them, say, Ted Cruz
or Marco Rubio.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes. And Ted Cruz
and Marco Rubio are going for
sort of different people.
But in the betting markets,
Marco Rubio is on the rise.
Marco Rubio in these markets
of people who sort of look at
the odds in a sort of outsider
way, his stock has risen.
He is now higher than Jeb Bush.
And he has been building an
organization, the same thing
very much true with Ted Cruz,
who has an organization. He has
people text in.
And he even has an app. He is
very serious about building an
organization. And as things
start to settle out and -- his
plan is, as things settle out
and Donald Trump loses some
of that...
GWEN IFILL: Those same people.
TAMARA KEITH: ... those
people will go to Ted Cruz.
GWEN IFILL: To Ted Cruz.
Let's talk about the Democrats,
a big weekend. Do you remember,
in 2007, Barack Obama went
to the Jefferson Jackson Day
Dinner in Des Moines, broke out,
and next thing you know
he had overwhelmed Hillary
Clinton and won Iowa?
Did anybody break
out this weekend?
TAMARA KEITH: No.
AMY WALTER: No. No,
this was not...
TAMARA KEITH: This is not 2007.
AMY WALTER: This was not 2007.
There wasn't a breakout. But,
listen, there was a change. And
you saw in Bernie Sanders
that night on Saturday night in
Des Moines a more pointed
criticism of Hillary Clinton
than we have seen before.
Now, he didn't use her name.
GWEN IFILL: Which you're not
allowed to, I think, at this
dinner.
AMY WALTER: That's
probably true.
(CROSSTALK)
AMY WALTER: So, it was
still a -- it was subtle.
But what he was saying, what his
message is, not only I am the
candidate that is talking
about income inequality and
making that the centerpiece of
my campaign, but I was there
first on issues that are
important to progressives, and I
have been there when it's not
convenient,
Iraq, Defense of Marriage
Act and on trade.
GWEN IFILL: And Hillary Clinton
responded, following him, by
throwing her arms around
Barack Obama and saying, I'm
the Democrat's Democrat.
TAMARA KEITH: Absolutely.
She -- and she had people there
with thunder sticks, and she --
she learned her lesson
from 2007, which was Barack
Obama basically out-organized
her and put on a better show,
and she wasn't going to go into
that without putting on quite a
show.
There was a sea of blue glow
sticks for Hillary Clinton. She
did make one remark that was
like a little dig at Bernie
Sanders, where she said, you
know, people say I'm shouting
too much on guns, which is
actually an issue that's sort of
the toughest issue for Bernie.
Well, you know, people often
think women are shouting. It was
sort of a...
GWEN IFILL: Lots of
gender references.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes, there was a
lot. She is -- Hillary Clinton
is definitely running as
a woman in a way that she
didn't last time around.
GWEN IFILL: Let's
talk about Joe Biden.
We watched him last night on "60
Minutes." He gave another one of
those emotional interviews.
But he also said some pretty
interesting things about why he
chose not to run, in particular
his assessment of and Jill --
Dr. Jill Biden's assessment of
Hillary Clinton.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
And, look, I think what he said,
quite simply, "I didn't think I
could win," although the
biggest thing I took out from
this interview was, this was
much more of an emotional than
a logical decision. This wasn't
about campaign finance, as much
as it was about a grieving
father. And, look...
GWEN IFILL: He talked about his
granddaughter saying, "Pop,
don't go away."
AMY WALTER: Right, tearing up
while -- you had to tear up when
you listened to him talk
about that.
And it was really clear that, no
matter -- if he wanted to do
this, and it's that he was
running against a calendar that
wasn't going to help him, new
filing deadlines were coming,
fund-raising was going to be
very difficult. And,
fundamentally, in order to beat
Hillary
Clinton, he was going to have to
take the case to Hillary
Clinton. She wasn't just going
to collapse.
And when you hear people around
Joe Biden, they talk about him,
they say he was never
going to be that candidate who
was going to directly at her.
GWEN IFILL: What
struck you the most?
TAMARA KEITH: Oh, that moment
that you talked about, too. It
was just -- it was so emotional.
And, also, I think that he was
watching the reports, that he
was paying attention to what
we were saying about whether
he was going to run or not.
(CROSSTALK)
TAMARA KEITH: He was annoyed by
it. And he thought, they're all
getting it wrong, because,
apparently, he hadn't
made up his mind.
GWEN IFILL: And so he decided to
get it right. It was a very
effective and interesting way
to do it.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
Amy Walter, Tamara
Keith, thank you all.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: Go have some meat.
(LAUGHTER)
AMY WALTER: Yes.
GWEN IFILL: Finally tonight, a
story of a historic flood and
bringing together ancient
craft and modern science
to restore masterworks.
Jeffrey Brown reports from
Florence, Italy, for his ongoing
series Culture at Risk.
JEFFREY BROWN: An artwork
brought back to life after
nearly 50 years. This is one of
five wood panels comprising
Giorgio Vasari's Last Supper, a
massive painting, some
21-feet-long
in all, first completed in 1546,
and now, after many thought it
impossible, approaching
a complete restoration.
CECILIA FROSININI, Opificio
delle Pietre Dure: This is
probably the only place where
you
can expect a miracle.
JEFFREY BROWN: Cecilia Frosinini
is overseeing the reconstruction
of The Last Supper at the
Opificio delle Pietre Dure, the
OPD, in Florence, Italy, one of
the world's foremost institutes
of art preservation and
restoration and a place itself
forged by tragedy.
It's hard to imagine today, but,
in 1966, this famous piazza and
much of Florence was
underwater, with devastating
consequences for the art
treasures for which this city
is so renowned.
NARRATOR: It all
started suddenly.
JEFFREY BROWN: November 1966,
days of rain swelled the Arno
River, sending water, oil
and sediment into Florence, in
the city's worst flood in nearly
400 years. It was captured
in this documentary by filmmaker
Franco Zeffirelli, narrated by
actor Richard Burton and
broadcast
on Italian state television.
More than 30 people died and
thousands of priceless works of
art and manuscripts were
damaged or destroyed. The
disaster inspired an outpouring
of support from around the
world,
enlisting donations and young
volunteers, known as Mud Angels,
to descend upon the city
to help clean up the mess.
LUDOVICA SEBREGONDI, Art
Historian, Santa Croce Church
(through translator): Here, the
water reached nearly 20 feet. It
was so shocking. And with the
water came damage. It moved
everything
everywhere.
JEFFREY BROWN: Ludovica
Sebregondi is an art historian
at the Santa Croce Church, which
sits just a few blocks from the
river. Parts of the church and
its famed museum were completely
submerged, including where
Vasari's Last Supper hung. It
remained underwater for more
than
48 hours.
Another victim, a huge crucifix
by Cimabue completed in the 13th
century, its paint almost
completely washed away by the
waters. The damaged crucifix has
returned, as have many
other works, this time to the
museum's higher ground, in case
the waters should return.
LUDOVICA SEBREGONDI (through
translator): Many of the
artworks have been restored in
these 50 years, but one has yet
to be returned. The most famous
of all is The Last Supper
by Vasari. It's a
symbol of the flood.
JEFFREY BROWN: A symbol because
of its size and the extent of
its damage. After the waters
receded, Vasari's work was
covered with sheets of fine
paper, in an emergency measure
to
prevent the paint from
separating from the wood. That
bought time, but for more than
40 years, few believed it
could be saved in one piece.
CECILIA FROSININI: Many of the
old restorers advised that,
basing on their experience,
based on their experience, the
only possible way was to destroy
the wood or at least to
try to preserve the wood,
but to separate in two.
JEFFREY BROWN: A decision was
made to wait, until new
restoration methods gave OPD
officials
confidence they could preserve
it in its original form.
And, in 2009, the work began.
The OPD, whose name translates
to the Workshop of Semi-Precious
Stones, has a storied history
itself. Dating to the 16th
century under the Medici family,
it produced the finest inlaid
mosaic and stonework, using
techniques that can still be
found at
its museum workshop
in Florence today.
In the 20th century, it turned
to conservation, and, expanding
into a Renaissance-era fort
after the 1966 flood, it
dramatically broadened its
mission and scope.
OPD director Marco Ciatti:
MARCO CIATTI, Director, Opificio
delle Pietre Dure: We needed new
techniques. Mainly, the
flood was the starting point
with the new relationship with
science.
JEFFREY BROWN: Around every
corner, a work by one master or
another, a Botticelli sitting
on an easel, Leonardo da Vinci's
Adoration of the Magi, usually
in Florence's Uffizi
Museum, awaiting a cleaning, and
more recent works, an early
Jackson Pollock that's just
arrived. It's part museum, part
workshop, part hospital for
threatened treasures.
TON WILMERING, Getty Foundation:
The dark areas are less dense,
so that's where paint
has been lost, and you can very
clearly see the splits between
the planks.
JEFFREY BROWN: Ton Wilmering, an
expert in wood restoration,
showed me a large X-ray
image of part of the Vasari.
Wilmering is with the Getty
Foundation, which helped fund
the Vasari project.
For the record, the Getty Trust
supports the "NewsHour"'s arts
coverage.
TON WILMERING: And when the
water receded, it pulled some of
the paint, it pulled some
of the gesso, which is the layer
in between the wood panel and
the paint, to the bottom.
And...
JEFFREY BROWN: You mean the
painting literally sort of
falls?
(CROSSTALK)
TON WILMERING: Sags, exactly.
JEFFREY BROWN: It
sags. I see. I see.
So what are you doing here?
You're taking a picture of the
painting.
RAFFAELLA FONTANA, Physicist:
Yes, we're trying to measure not
only the visible image of a
painting, but also what is
beneath the paint layer.
JEFFREY BROWN: Raffaella Fontana
is a physicist using
multispectrum scanning
techniques to
peer beneath the surface of
paintings, a noninvasive way to
create complex models of their
many
layers.
RAFFAELLA FONTANA: And then
there are conservators and
restorers that pick up our data
and decide
how to work on a painting.
JEFFREY BROWN: One of those
restorers is Ciro Castelli using
knowledge and tools that date
back further than the
Renaissance masterworks
themselves. He was a young
carpenter just
beginning his career when the
flood hit. He helped removed mud
and then began to work
with expert wood restorers.
CIRO CASTELLI, Restorer (through
translator): To work on wood,
you need to know it. Knowing
how wood reacts is vital for
restoration. We can't restore a
painting if we don't know
about its structure. Woodcraft
spans more than centuries. It's
millennia.
JEFFREY BROWN: Castelli came out
of retirement to work on the
Vasari paneling. And a key
goal of this project is that he
not only apply his special
knowledge to this individual
work,
but also train a new
generation of restorers.
CIRO CASTELLI (through
translator): Working with
younger people is a way to stay
young,
not just as far as the spirit is
concerned, but in the activity
itself as well. Working
with younger people means
passing on our knowledge, which
benefits those of us who provide
the
knowledge too.
JEFFREY BROWN: There is concern
here, amid Italy's continuing
economic troubles, about
funding to train and employ this
next generation. Still, as the
50th anniversary of Florence's
Great Flood approaches, Cecilia
Frosinini hopes to have the Last
Supper finished and
returned to the
Santa Croce Museum.
CECILIA FROSININI: Giving back
this painting to the city is a
very important symbolic act.
JEFFREY BROWN: And you're
going to make it in time?
CECILIA FROSININI: We are
really, really going for this
deadline. I think we will make
it.
JEFFREY BROWN: From Florence,
Italy, I'm Jeffrey Brown for the
"PBS NewsHour."
GWEN IFILL: You can go behind
the scenes, even more online,
where you will find producer
Frank Carlson's photo essay on
the OPD and the Santa Croce
Museum.
And, tomorrow, Jeff returns with
a second story of Culture at
Risk in Italy, this time
a dying hilltop town that's
coming back to life through
engineering and tourism.
On the "NewsHour" online, we pay
tribute to "Joy of Painting"
master Bob Ross by trying
to imitate his happy trees in a
painting of our own. The late
PBS star's official YouTube
channel released his very first
episode from 1983, and we
decided to try to follow along
with his master class.
The result -- you be the judge
-- is posted on our home page,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
And tune in later tonight, on
"Charlie Rose," for Democratic
presidential candidate Bernie
Sanders.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening. For all of us
here at the "PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.